Rework specification with a focus on backwards compatibility (#175)
graphql/graphql-over-http: spec/GraphQLOverHTTP.md

## GraphQL Over HTTP

Note: **Stage 0: Preliminary** This spec is under active development, and not
ready for implementations yet. For more information, please see the
[Roadmap](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-over-http/blob/master/ROADMAP.md)
or
[how to get involved](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-over-http/blob/master/INTERESTED_DEVELOPERS.md).
You can find our community in the #graphql-over-http channel on the
[GraphQL Foundation Discord](https://discord.graphql.org).

---

# GraphQL over HTTP

**Introduction**

> This specification details how libraries that wish to publish and consume
> GraphQL services over HTTP should do so in order to maximize interoperability
> between client libraries, tools, and server implementations. This specification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This specification details how GraphQL should be served and consumed over HTTP
in order to maximize interoperability between clients, servers and tools. This specification
```

The spec concerns not only libraries, but also frameworks, applications, etc.

Author: What would be a good catch-all term? `software`?

Reviewer 2: `implementors`?

I also like the suggested text.

Reviewer: If we phrase it different, we can avoid having to find a term.

Author: My apologies I completely missed that there was a suggestion there somehow :sweat_smile:

does not override or replace the
[GraphQL specification](https://spec.graphql.org/), it extends it to cover the
topic of serving GraphQL services over HTTP. If any statement or algorithm in
this specification appears to conflict with the GraphQL specification, the
behavior detailed in the GraphQL specification should be used.

The [GraphQL specification](https://spec.graphql.org/) deliberately does not
specify the transport layer, however HTTP is the most common choice when serving
GraphQL to remote clients due to its ubiquity.

Previous to this specification, the article
[Serving over HTTP](https://graphql.org/learn/serving-over-http/)
([WayBack Machine entry, 1st June 2022](https://web.archive.org/web/20220601155421/https://graphql.org/learn/serving-over-http/))
on the graphql.org website served as guidance, and leading implementations on
both client and server have mostly upheld those best practices and thus
established a de-facto standard that is commonly used throughout the ecosystem.
This specification aims to codify and expand on this work.

**Copyright notice**

Copyright © 2022-present, GraphQL contributors

> THESE MATERIALS ARE PROVIDED “AS IS.” The parties expressly disclaim any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
THESE MATERIALS ARE PROVIDED “AS IS”. The parties expressly disclaim any
```

Reviewer: Not necessarily. I checked the MIT license - which I believe inspired this - and it puts a comma behind the quotes. https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT

Author: This copyright notice is copied and pasted from the GraphQL spec; if we are to change it, we should change it there before reflecting it elsewhere:

https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/4de87822d2bc807b746c6a37f6a99bb54d705185/spec/GraphQL.md?plain=1#L35

But although the grammar is incorrect, I agree that we should use the standard license, not the one with correct grammar :+1: 

I'm going to close this conversation, but please feel free to raise a PR against the GraphQL spec and we can discuss it there.

specification does not override or replace the
[GraphQL specification](https://spec.graphql.org/), it extends it to cover the
topic of serving GraphQL services over HTTP. If any statement or algorithm in
this specification appears to conflict with the GraphQL specification, the
behavior detailed in the GraphQL specification should be used.

The [GraphQL specification](https://spec.graphql.org/) deliberately does not
specify the transport layer, however HTTP is the most common choice when serving
GraphQL to remote clients due to its ubiquity.

Previous to this specification, the article
[Serving over HTTP](https://graphql.org/learn/serving-over-http/)
([WayBack Machine entry, 1st June 2022](https://web.archive.org/web/20220601155421/https://graphql.org/learn/serving-over-http/))
on the graphql.org website served as guidance, and leading implementations on
both client and server have mostly upheld those best practices and thus
established a de-facto standard that is commonly used throughout the ecosystem.
This specification aims to codify and expand on this work.

**Copyright notice**

Copyright © 2022-present, GraphQL contributors

> THESE MATERIALS ARE PROVIDED “AS IS.” The parties expressly disclaim any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
THESE MATERIALS ARE PROVIDED “AS IS”. The parties expressly disclaim any
```

# Overview

Though [the GraphQL specification](https://spec.graphql.org) is transport
agnostic, this GraphQL over HTTP specification aims to map GraphQL's semantics
to their HTTP equivalents, enabling us to combine the full advantages of GraphQL
with the rich feature set of HTTP.

> GraphQL queries and mutations naturally follow the request/response message

Author: ```suggestion
GraphQL queries and mutations naturally mirror the request/response message
```

:: In this document, the term {GraphQL request} refers to a
[request as defined by the GraphQL Specification](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#request).

:: In this document, the term {GraphQL response} refers to a
[response as defined by the GraphQL Specification](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Response).

:: In this document, the term {GraphQL request error} refers to a
[request error as defined by the GraphQL specification](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Errors.Request-errors).

:: In this document, the term {GraphQL field error} refers to a
[field error as defined by the GraphQL specification](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Errors.Field-errors)

:: In this document, the term {server} refers to a GraphQL over HTTP
Specification compliant HTTP server unless the context indicates otherwise.

:: In this document, the term {client} refers to a GraphQL over HTTP
Specification compliant HTTP client unless the context indicates otherwise.

# URL

A server MUST enable GraphQL requests to one of more GraphQL schemas.

Each GraphQL schema a server provides MUST be served via one or more URLs.

> A client MUST be able to send all their GraphQL query and mutation requests for
> a single GraphQL schema made available by a server to a single URL endpoint on
> that server. A server MUST NOT require the client to use different URLs for
> different GraphQL query and mutation requests to the same GraphQL schema.

Author: ```suggestion
A server MUST NOT require the client to use different URLs for
different GraphQL query and mutation requests to the same GraphQL schema.
```

Note: This means that a client must be able to issue all GraphQL query and

> mutation operations it needs via a single endpoint.

Author: Good question. The first two are required; imagine you have three endpoints for the same schema: `/a`, `/b` and `/c`.

Imagine you can issue all operations to `/a`, only named operations to `/b` and only unnamed operations to `/c`. This would pass sentence 1 but not sentence 2. But sentence 2 might cover both cases.

I think you're right; we should trim this down to just sentence 2.

# URL

A server MUST enable GraphQL requests to one or more GraphQL schemas.

Each GraphQL schema a server provides MUST be served via one or more URLs.

> A server MUST NOT require the client to use different URLs for different GraphQL
> query and mutation requests to the same GraphQL schema.

Reviewer 2: By mentioning these specifically, it might create confusion as to why subscriptions are not mentioned.

```suggestion
A server MUST NOT require the client to use different URLs for different GraphQL
requests to the same GraphQL schema.
```

# Serialization Format

The GraphQL specification allows for many
[serialization formats to be implemented](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Serialization-Format).
Servers and clients MUST support JSON and MAY support other, additional
serialization formats.

For consistency and ease of notation, examples of the response are given in JSON
throughout this specification.

## Media Types

The following are the officially recognized GraphQL media types to designate
using the JSON encoding for GraphQL requests and responses over HTTP.

| Name                       | Description                                   |
| -------------------------- | --------------------------------------------- |

> | `application/graphql+json` | The preferred type; better HTTP compatibility |

Author: I think that's outside the scope of this spec right now; we do _allow_ for it, but we don't _specify_ it.

> | `application/graphql+json` | The preferred type; better HTTP compatibility |

Reviewer 2: I think we should state something, though.  A server that chooses not to support JSON would not know what to do.

> | `application/graphql+json` | The preferred type; better HTTP compatibility |

Author: I'm going to move "A server MAY support requests encoded with and/or accepting other media types." and related rules back into this section.

> | `application/graphql+json` | The preferred type; better HTTP compatibility |

Author: (I've made this change; if you're happy with it please close the conversation :+1:)

  execute.
- {variables} - (_Optional_): Values for any Variables defined by the Operation.
- {extensions} - (_Optional_): This entry is reserved for implementors to extend
  the protocol however they see fit.

Note: When comparing against
[request in the GraphQL specification](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#request)
you should note the schema and "initial value" are not included in the
GraphQL-over-HTTP request, they are handled by the server based on the URL used.

Note: Be aware that `query` is a misleading parameter name as its value is a
string describing one or more operations, each of which may be a query, mutation
or subscription. A better name would have been `document`, but the term `query`
is well established.

Note: Depending on the serialization format used, values of the aforementioned
parameters can be encoded differently but their names and semantics must stay
the same.

Note: Specifying `null` in JSON (or equivalent values in other formats) as
values for optional request parameters is equivalent to not specifying them at
all.

Note: {variables} and {extensions}, if set, must have a map as their value.

> ### JSON Encoding

Author: Maybe, but I moved it up here because it's one of a number of possible encodings of the request parameters; for `GET` there's only really one choice. But yeah, maybe we should move it back again :man_shrugging:

> ### JSON Encoding

Author: Moved.

When encoded in JSON, a GraphQL-over-HTTP request is a JSON object (map), with
the properties specified by the GraphQL-over-HTTP request:

- {query} - the string representation the Source Text of the Document as
  specified in
  [the Language section of the GraphQL specification](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Language).
- {operationName} - an optional string
- {variables} - an optional object (map), the keys of which are the variable
  names and the values of which are the variable values
- {extensions} - an optional object (map)

> ## Accept

Reviewer 2: This spec bounces around a lot.  If I were implementing a client or a server separately, it might be hard to determine what it means to be compliant.  Creating a separation might make it easier.

> ## Accept

Author: Ah, great comment. Believe it or not I was trying not to change too much so didn't change the section titles :laughing: But yeah, I think I was thinking of it in terms of client/server rather than request/response a lot of the time, it feels more natural. I'll think about it...

A client SHOULD indicate the media types that it supports in responses using the
`Accept` HTTP header as specified in
[RFC7231](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231).

A client SHOULD include `application/graphql+json` in the `Accept` header.

A client MUST include `application/json` in the `Accept` header.

It is RECOMMENDED that a client set the `Accept` header to
`application/graphql+json; charset=utf-8, application/json; charset=utf-8`.

Note: This recommended header enables compatibility with legacy servers whilst
still leveraging modern features if available in the server.

## GET

> For HTTP GET requests, the query parameters MUST be provided in the query

Author: Good catch! I'm surprised the word "query" didn't stick out to me more :rofl:

# Serialization Format

The GraphQL specification allows for many
[serialization formats to be implemented](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Serialization-Format).
Servers and clients MUST support JSON and MAY support other, additional
serialization formats.

For consistency and ease of notation, examples of the response are given in JSON
throughout this specification.

## Media Types

The following are the officially recognized GraphQL media types to designate
using the JSON encoding for GraphQL requests and responses over HTTP.

| Name                       | Description                                   |
| -------------------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| `application/graphql+json` | The preferred type; better HTTP compatibility |
| `application/json`         | To support legacy clients                     |

For details of the shapes of these JSON payloads, please see
[Request](#sec-Request) and [Response](#sec-Response).

If the media type in a `Content-Type` or `Accept` header includes encoding
information, then the encoding MUST be `utf-8` (e.g.
`Content-Type: application/graphql+json; charset=utf-8`). If encoding

> information is not included then `utf-8` should be assumed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
information is not included then `utf-8` MUST be assumed.
```

I think making this default a strong requirement is essential to ensure interoperability.

Reviewer 2: Agreed

A server MUST support requests encoded with the `application/json` media type
(as indicated by the `Content-Type` header).

A server MUST support requests which accept the `application/json` media type
(as indicated by the `Accept` header).

A server SHOULD support requests encoded with the `application/graphql+json`
media type (as indicated by the `Content-Type` header).

A server SHOULD support requests which accept the `application/graphql+json`
media type (as indicated by the `Accept` header).

A server MAY support requests encoded with and/or accepting other media types.

> If the client does not supply a `Content-Type` header, the server SHOULD treat

Reviewer 3: Do we have servers out there that accept the `Content-Type` being empty? I think the biggest issue was more about the Accept header since many clients do not yet send one. 

I think we can expect the `Content-Type` header to be set to `application/json` or `application/graphql+json`. Legacy clients will send `application/json` and this SHOULD be supported.

Author: You're probably right; even if you're using `curl` you'd expect to set a content-type header, otherwise it's assumed it's `application/x-www-form-urlencoded`. Good catch; I'll get this fixed 👍

Author: I've changed it such that the `Content-Type` **MUST** be indicated by the client.

Note: Prior to this specification, the media type `application/json` was in wide
use for both the HTTP request body type and the HTTP response payload type.
Unfortunately this causes a number of issues, not least that it means clients
cannot trust responses from the server that do not use an HTTP 2xx status code
(since these replies may come from non-compliant HTTP servers or proxies
somewhere in the request chain). For this reason, this specification introduces
the `application/graphql+json` media type; however, to give existing servers
time to move over, it is not required to be supported until 1st January 2025.

### Legacy watershed

From 1st January 2025 (`2025-01-01T00:00:00Z`), a server MUST support requests
encoded with the `application/graphql+json` media type (as indicated by the
`Content-Type` header).

From 1st January 2025 (`2025-01-01T00:00:00Z`), a server MUST support requests
which accept the `application/graphql+json` media type (as indicated by the
`Accept` header).

# Request

A server MUST accept POST requests, and MAY accept other HTTP methods, such as
GET.

## Request Parameters

A {GraphQL-over-HTTP request} is formed of the following parameters:

> - {query} - A Document containing GraphQL Operations and Fragments to execute.

Reviewer 3: This also should be optional to allow for persisted queries, but I can do a separate PR on this outlining the use-case. I original added the `{extensions}` for this so the persisted query id can now go into that map.

Author: I don't think that a server that only allows persisted operations is a truly GraphQL-over-HTTP compliant server. The literal intent of an operation allowlist is to _prevent_ interoperability, and that's okay!

Author: > The Apollo implementation of automatic persisted queries works by leaving out query in the particular requests [...] If we want to try to make the Apollo APQ protocol not a violation of this spec, we could make query optional and have some sort of note stating that when query is left out, the server must have some sort of extensions-based mechanism for deriving the Document.

I think it's okay for Automatic Persisted Queries to not be an official GraphQL request - the point of the specification is to define a common set of rules that means a compliant client from any vendor can speak to a compliant server from any vendor. APQ is not part of that flow, it's a specific behavior that the client/server can negotiate as an extension, separate from this specification.

> Does the spec actually explain anywhere what to do if the query is not provided? I suppose for GETs this falls into the "Server URLs which enable GraphQL requests MAY also be used for other purposes" thing to some degree.

"A {GraphQL-over-HTTP request} is formed of the following parameters" implies that missing "query" means that it's not a "GraphQL over HTTP request"; then we have "When a server receives a {GraphQL-over-HTTP request}, it must return a well‐formed response." but it's not a GraphQL over HTTP request, so it's up to the server how to handle it, either by classifying it as "other purposes" (in this case serving GraphQL but in a way not 100% compatible with the GraphQL-over-HTTP spec), or it can throw an error.

Maybe we could add a non-normative note to make this clearer? Or indicate that there may be more ways to talk GraphQL with a webserver than strictly defined in this spec?

Reviewer 4: >I think it's okay for Automatic Persisted Queries to not be an official GraphQL request - the point of the specification is to define a common set of rules that means a compliant client from any vendor can speak to a compliant server from any vendor. APQ is not part of that flow, it's a specific behavior that the client/server can negotiate as an extension, separate from this specification.

Yep, that's fair. I just wanted to clarify that with our "automatic" PQ implementation, you don't have "a server that only allows persisted operations".

Re the second point, no strong feelings here (I think the spec is fine as given).

> - {query} - A Document containing GraphQL Operations and Fragments to execute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- {query} - The string representation of a Document containing GraphQL Operations and Fragments to execute.
```

See https://github.com/graphql/graphql-over-http/issues/176 for context.

Author: I am choosing not to adopt this change for the reasons laid out in https://github.com/graphql/graphql-over-http/issues/176#issuecomment-1154019962 ; let's discuss it in a separate PR.

Reviewer: How is interoperability possible if the client does not send a string?

Author: In GET, we state:

> The `query` parameter MUST be the string representation of the Source Text of
the Document as specified in [...]

In POST, we state:

> When encoded in JSON [...]
> - {query} - the string representation of the Source Text of the Document as specified in [...]

Thus for the standard encodings, string is specified for compatibility. However, alternative encodings are allowed by the spec (but not specified); these could come up with alternative serialization for the GraphQL query that is more efficient on the wire; for example you could consider a binary encoding that numbers all the keywords known to GraphQL and has an incredibly efficient encoding of a query; this should not fail the GraphQL-over-HTTP spec, it's something that we could later standardize even - e.g. `application/octet-graphql` may one day be included in this specification.

What matters for alternative (non-standard) encodings is what meaning the payloads must contain, not the specific stucture with which they do so.

- {operationName} - (_Optional_): The name of the Operation in the Document to
  execute.
- {variables} - (_Optional_): Values for any Variables defined by the Operation.
- {extensions} - (_Optional_): This entry is reserved for implementors to extend
  the protocol however they see fit.

> Note: When comparing against

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: When comparing against a
```

Reviewer 2: Though it does sound like it should read `When comparing against a request...`, I don't think it should.  I believe it should be read as something like `When comparing against the request section in the GraphQL specification`.

Author: Indeed, it is referring to the term "request" rather than a specific request. I'll put request in quote marks to make this clearer :+1:

[request in the GraphQL specification](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#request)
you should note the schema and "initial value" are not included in the
GraphQL-over-HTTP request, they are handled by the server based on the URL used.

> Note: Be aware that `query` is a misleading parameter name as its value is a

Reviewer 3: Should we not introduce a new term in this case `document` and support `query` as deprecated. Also, this discussion should go in a separate PR. But something we should think about.

Author: I was seriously tempted to make it so that `application/graphql+json` uses the term "document" (or maybe "source") whereas `application/json` uses "query", but decided that this would probably be ill advised. So yeah, definitely a follow-up discussion for that 👍

A client SHOULD include `application/graphql+json` in the `Accept` header.

A client MUST include `application/json` in the `Accept` header.

It is RECOMMENDED that a client set the `Accept` header to
`application/graphql+json; charset=utf-8, application/json; charset=utf-8`.

Note: This recommended header enables compatibility with legacy servers whilst
still leveraging modern features if available in the server.

## GET

For HTTP GET requests, the GraphQL request parameters MUST be provided in the
query component of the request URL in the `application/x-www-form-urlencoded`
format as specified by
[WhatWG's URLSearchParams class](https://url.spec.whatwg.org/#interface-urlsearchparams).

The `query` parameter MUST be the string representation of the Source Text of
the Document as specified in
[the Language section of the GraphQL specification](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Language).

The `variables` parameter, if used, MUST be represented as a URL-encoded JSON
string.

### Example

If we wanted to execute the following GraphQL query:

```raw graphql example
query($id: ID!){user(id:$id){name}}
```

With the following query variables:

> ```json example

Reviewer: Should this also be in the raw encoded form?

Author: No; the whitespace in the JSON is unimportant.

Reviewer: Right, but that is also true for whitespace in the GraphQL. I think it would be self-consistent if both examples were either minified or formatted.

Author: You're right; the encoding in the URL should match that in the example :+1:

- {extensions} - (_Optional_): This entry is reserved for implementors to extend
  the protocol however they see fit.

> Note: When comparing {GraphQL-over-HTTP request} against the term

Author: Please raise an editorial PR, it's not clear to me the concern you have here.

> Note: When comparing {GraphQL-over-HTTP request} against the term

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/graphql/graphql-over-http/pull/199/files

["request"](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#request) in the GraphQL
specification you should note the {GraphQL schema} and "initial value" are not
included in the GraphQL-over-HTTP {request}, they are handled by the {server}
based on the URL used.

Note: Be aware that `query` is a misleading parameter name as its value is a
string describing one or more operations, each of which may be a query, mutation

> or subscription. A better name would have been `document`, but the term `query`

Reviewer 4: This is the only reference to subscriptions in the spec. Perhaps it should be dropped, and/or there should be an explicit note that this spec doesn't provide a transport for subscriptions at this time.

[RFC7231](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231).

If the client supplies an `Accept` header, the client SHOULD include the media
type `application/graphql+json` in the `Accept` header.

### Legacy Watershed

Before `2025-01-01T00:00:00Z`, if the client supplies an `Accept` header, the
header SHOULD include the `application/json` media type. After this watershed,
this is no longer necessary.

It is RECOMMENDED that a client set the `Accept` header to
`application/graphql+json; charset=utf-8, application/json; charset=utf-8`.

Note: This recommended header enables compatibility with legacy servers whilst
still leveraging modern features if available in the server.

## GET

For HTTP GET requests, the GraphQL request parameters MUST be provided in the
query component of the request URL in the `application/x-www-form-urlencoded`
format as specified by
[WhatWG's URLSearchParams class](https://url.spec.whatwg.org/#interface-urlsearchparams).

The `query` parameter MUST be the string representation of the Source Text of
the Document as specified in
[the Language section of the GraphQL specification](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Language).

> The `variables` parameter, if used, MUST be represented as a URL-encoded JSON

Reviewer 4: Why not specify the same thing for `extensions`?

Author: I've never noticed extensions being used in a URL, but you noted it is used for APQ so I'll add it :+1:

`Accept` HTTP header as specified in
[RFC7231](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231).

> If the client supplies an `Accept` header, a client SHOULD include the media

Reviewer 2: Consider consistent language:  `the client` vs `a client`

http://example.com/graphql?query=query(%24id%3A%20ID!)%7Buser(id%3A%24id)%7Bname%7D%7D&variables=%7B%22id%22%3A%22QVBJcy5ndXJ1%22%7D
```

Note: {query} and {operationName} parameters are encoded as raw strings in the
query component. Therefore if the query string contained `operationName=null`
then it should be interpreted as the {operationName} being the string `"null"`.
If a literal `null` is desired, the parameter (e.g. {operationName}) should be
omitted.

GET requests MUST NOT be used for executing mutation operations. If the values
of {query} and {operationName} indicate that a mutation operation is to be
executed, the server MUST respond with error status code `405` (Method Not
Allowed) and halt execution. This restriction is necessary to conform with the
long-established semantics of safe methods within HTTP.

## POST

A GraphQL POST request instructs the server to perform a query or mutation
operation. A GraphQL POST request MUST have a body which contains values of the
request parameters encoded in one of the officially recognized GraphQL media

> types, or another media type supported by the server.

Author: I see your point. I think that though JSON is the concrete representation, because there are two distinct media types (`application/json` and `application/graphql+json`) it makes sense to keep it as is - but if you can think of better wording I'm definitely open to it!

media types the server supports then it SHOULD use
`Content-Type: application/json` in requests. After this date, if a client does
not know the media types the server supports then it SHOULD use
`Content-Type: application/graphql+json` in requests.

### Example

If we wanted to execute the following GraphQL query:

```graphql example
query ($id: ID!) {
  user(id: $id) {
    name
  }
}
```

With the following query variables:

```json example
{
  "id": "QVBJcy5ndXJ1"
}
```

This request could be sent via an HTTP POST to the relevant URL using the JSON
encoding with the headers:

```headers example
Content-Type: application/graphql+json
Accept: application/graphql+json
```

And the body:

```json example
{
  "query": "query ($id: ID!) { user(id:$id) { name } }",
  "variables": { "id": "QVBJcy5ndXJ1" }
}
```

# Response

When a server receives a GraphQL request, it must return a well‐formed response.
The server's response describes the result of validating and executing the
requested operation if successful, and describes any errors encountered during
the request.

A server must comply with
[RFC7231](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231).

> ## Interpreting the request

Author: Yeah; you might be right. I moved this around quite a few times before putting it here; I think I was thinking of it as "client" and "server" rather than "request" and "response" but the sections are clearly request/response so I should move it.

> ## Interpreting the request

Author: Moved into the "Media type" section instead.

A server MUST support requests encoded with the `application/json` media type
(as indicated by the `Content-Type` header).

A server MUST support requests which accept the `application/json` media type
(as indicated by the `Accept` header).

A server SHOULD support requests encoded with the `application/graphql+json`
media type (as indicated by the `Content-Type` header).

A server SHOULD support requests which accept the `application/graphql+json`
media type (as indicated by the `Accept` header).

A server MAY support requests encoded with and/or accepting other media types.

If the client does not supply a `Content-Type` header, the server SHOULD treat
the request as if it had `Content-Type: application/json`.

If the client does not supply an `Accept` header, the server SHOULD treat the

> request as if it had `Accept: application/json`.

Author: Right, but the `Note` is non-normative - it's mostly there for people just reading that part of the spec and not finding this. We may not need it if we move this section.

encoded directly in the chosen media type.

A server MUST indicate the media type of the response with a `Content-Type`
header.

If an `Accept` header is provided, the server MUST respect the given `Accept`
header and attempt to encode the response in the highest priority supported
media type listed.

In alignment with the
[HTTP 1.1 Accept](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-5.3.2)
specification, when a client does not include at least one supported media type
in the `Accept` HTTP header, the server MUST either:

1. Disregard the `Accept` header and respond with the default media type of
   `application/json`, specifying this in the `Content-Type` header; OR
2. Respond with a `406 Not Acceptable` status code and stop processing the
   request.

## Validation

Validation of a well-formed GraphQL-over-HTTP request SHOULD apply all the
[validation rules](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Validation) specified by
the GraphQL specification.

The server MAY, at its discretion, apply additional validation rules.

## Execution

Execution of a GraphQL-over-HTTP request follows the
[ExecuteRequest()](<https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#ExecuteRequest()>) algorithm

> specified in the GraphQL specification.

Author: I'm not sure exactly how to do that, and doing so may confuse terminology (e.g. "request" would become heavily overloaded). I think better to keep them separate and reference.

I've used "GraphQL's ExecuteRequest()" style of wording in other places that seems to work well (and be less wordy) - I'll adopt that here :+1:

> specified in the GraphQL specification.

Reviewer 2: I see your point.  And this style of wording does work well.  It got me to thinking, though, that there is a big assumption for this spec that has been left unsaid (that this spec seeks never to override the GraphQL spec, but only add to it in order to support serving it over HTTP).

Readers may (if left unsaid) be confused at times if ever there is something in this spec that seems to be in conflict with the GraphQL spec.  For instance, there is no distinction in this spec between an HTTP server and a GraphQL server (perhaps an implementation would combine them, but perhaps not).  If an implementor were to read this spec, and see that it states that `The GraphQL server should not make authorization decisions based on any part of the GraphQL request`, they may be confused.

> specified in the GraphQL specification.

Author: I believe this has now been addressed :+1:

## Status Codes

In case of errors that completely prevent the generation of a well-formed
GraphQL response, the server SHOULD respond with the appropriate status code
depending on the concrete error condition.

Note: Typically this will be the `400` (Bad Request) status code.

Otherwise, the status codes depends on the media type with which the GraphQL
response will be served:

### application/json

This section only applies when the response body is to use the
`application/json` media type.

The server SHOULD use the `200` status code, independent of any {GraphQL request
error} or {GraphQL field error} raised.

Note: A status code in the `4xx` or `5xx` ranges or status code `203` (and maybe
others) could originate from intermediary servers; since the client cannot
determine if an `application/json` response with arbitrary status code is a

> well-formed GraphQL response (because it cannot trust the source) we must use

Reviewer 2: Should `we` be replaced with something else?

> 

Reviewer 4: (Previous line) Why not mention how `operationName` is encoded outside of the Note?

GET requests MUST NOT be used for executing mutation operations. If the values
of {query} and {operationName} indicate that a mutation operation is to be
executed, the server MUST respond with error status code `405` (Method Not
Allowed) and halt execution. This restriction is necessary to conform with the

> long-established semantics of safe methods within HTTP.

Reviewer 4: Would it be interesting to include a further non-normative note here saying something like:

Additionally, restricting mutations to POSTs which MUST contain a `Content-Type` header ensures that mutations cannot be sent as part of [cross-site request forgery (CSRF) attacks](https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/csrf), as long as the `Content-Type` header is not allowed to be one of the three values which can be in a [CORS-safelisted `Content-Type` request header](https://fetch.spec.whatwg.org/#cors-safelisted-request-header) (`application/x-www-form-urlencoded`, `multipart/form-data`, or `text/plain`).

(that `MUST` assumes my other suggestion is taken, which perhaps it won't be)

## POST

A GraphQL POST request instructs the server to perform a query or mutation
operation. A GraphQL POST request MUST have a body which contains values of the
request parameters encoded in one of the officially recognized GraphQL media
types, or another media type supported by the server.

A client MUST indicate the media type of a request body using the `Content-Type`
header as specified in [RFC7231](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231).

A server MUST support POST requests encoded with the `application/json` media
type (as indicated by the `Content-Type` header).

If the client does not supply a `Content-Type` header with a POST request, the

> server SHOULD reject the request using the appropriate `4xx` status code.

Reviewer 4: I'd consider making this a MUST for CSRF-protection reasons. A server that allows a POST with no custom headers containing a mutation (and which uses cookies for authentication) is vulnerable to trivial CSRFs.

A server MAY support POST requests encoded with and/or accepting other media

> types.

Reviewer 4: A non-normative note suggesting that servers which support POST requests with content-type `application/x-www-form-urlencoded`, `multipart/form-data`, or `text/plain` need to take extra care to avoid CSRF may be useful.

   `application/json`, specifying this in the `Content-Type` header; OR
2. Respond with a `406 Not Acceptable` status code and stop processing the
   request.

A server MUST support requests which accept the `application/json` media type
(as indicated by the `Accept` header).

A server SHOULD support requests which accept the `application/graphql+json`
media type (as indicated by the `Accept` header).

Note: Prior to this specification, the media type `application/json` was in wide
use for the HTTP response payload type. Unfortunately this means clients cannot
trust responses from the server that do not use an HTTP 2xx status code (since
these replies may come from non-compliant HTTP servers or proxies somewhere in
the request chain). For this reason, this specification introduces the
`application/graphql+json` media type on responses; however, to give existing
servers time to move over, it is not required to be supported until 1st
January 2025.

### Legacy watershed

From 1st January 2025 (`2025-01-01T00:00:00Z`), a server MUST support requests
which accept the `application/graphql+json` media type (as indicated by the
`Accept` header).

> Before 1st January 2025 (`2025-01-01T00:00:00Z`), if the client does not supply

Reviewer 4: Is the implication here that spec-compatible servers should literally contain a conditional checking the current time (until we're in 2025 and that conditional can be removed)? Or I guess because this is merely a SHOULD it is OK for a server author to just decide to transition their code from one default to the other at a point that feels reasonable?

Author: 1. Should it contain a conditional check on the time? Yes, ideally.
2. Can it just decide to transition the code from one default to another at a point that feels reasonable? Yes, knowing that it could cause issues for legacy clients.

Note: client's SHOULD include `Accept` and SHOULD accept `application/graphql+json`, so the only clients affected by this will be clients who a) do not issue `Accept` headers, and b) actually bother to read the `Content-Type` of the response and explicitly do not support `application/graphql+json`. I wonder what the size of that Venn diagram overlap is - perhaps you have data on that at Apollo?

I wonder if we should make it so that clients MUST include an `Accept` header from the watershed?

Author: Yeah; curl et al is the main reason that I left this as a SHOULD in the first place; but it's also why I figure if you don't supply `Accept` you probably don't care about what the server says the `Content-Type` is :laughing:

Reviewer 2: > Should it contain a conditional check on the time? Yes, ideally.

I see this differently.  I don't see the purpose of a watershed as to set a precise date at which functionality should be turned on.  The way I see it, a watershed is to set a date at which a server without such functionality is no longer compliant.  During the time between now and the date of the watershed, new releases of a server should gradually start to support the new functionality described in the spec.  Ideally (and totally at the discretion of the implementor), a server would be backward compatible.

Author: I broadly agree, but David has pointed out the point where there is a sudden change in the recommended behaviour - the interpretation of a request without an `Accept` header should be `application/json` before and `application/graphql+json` after. That said, since it's only a SHOULD it doesn't matter too much and you don't _need_ a time check.

Otherwise, the status codes depends on the media type with which the GraphQL
response will be served:

### application/json

This section only applies when the response body is to use the
`application/json` media type.

The server SHOULD use the `200` status code, independent of any {GraphQL request
error} or {GraphQL field error} raised.

Note: A status code in the `4xx` or `5xx` ranges or status code `203` (and maybe
others) could originate from intermediary servers; since the client cannot
determine if an `application/json` response with arbitrary status code is a
well-formed GraphQL response (because it cannot trust the source) the server
must use `200` status code to guarantee to the client that the response has not
been generated or modified by an intermediary.

If the GraphQL response contains a non-null {data} entry then the server MUST
use the `200` status code.

Note: This indicates that no {GraphQL request error} was raised, though one or
more {GraphQL field error} may have been raised this is still a successful
execution - see "partial response" in the GraphQL specification.

The server SHOULD NOT use a `4xx` or `5xx` status code.

> Note: For compatibility with legacy servers, this specification allows the use

Reviewer 4: For what it's worth, Apollo Server does use 400s for GraphQL request errors (in a somewhat inconsistent way in AS3, and in a more consistent way in AS4). I don't think we are going to choose to change those to 200s for `application/json` as encouraged by this spec.  I do look forward to implementing `application/graphql+json` responses, though. My understanding is that this only violates SHOULDs, and I don't disagree with the recommendations of the spec.

Author: Not changing them is fine. Once 2025 rolls around this'll be a non-issue hopefully :crossed_fingers:

document.

If the GraphQL response contains the {data} entry and it is {null}, then the
server SHOULD reply with a `2xx` status code and it is RECOMMENDED it replies
with `200` status code.

Note: Using `4xx` and `5xx` status codes in this situation is not recommended -
since no {GraphQL request error} has occurred it is seen as a "partial
response".

If the GraphQL response does not contain the {data} entry then the server MUST
reply with a `4xx` or `5xx` status code as appropriate.

Note: The GraphQL specification indicates that the only situation in which the
GraphQL response does not include the {data} entry is one in which the {errors}
entry is populated.

If the GraphQL request is invalid (e.g. it is malformed, or does not pass
validation) then the server SHOULD reply with `400` status code.

If the client is not permitted to issue the GraphQL request then the server
SHOULD reply with `403`, `401` or similar appropriate status code.

#### Examples

The following examples provide guidance on how to deal with specific error cases
when using the `application/graphql+json` media type to encode the response
body:

> ##### Invalid request body or parsing failure

Reviewer 4: Should this also include failure to parse `variables` or `extensions` provided as GET parameters?

It looks like this is about failures to produce a GraphQL request. But that's separate from GraphQL parse failures... which should probably have its own section?

Author: I've tried editing this in, but it just gets more confusing because there's so many different ways of encoding a bad request. Since it's just an example I think it's fine to leave it as-is. What do you think?

Reviewer 4: I think there's a pretty big difference between "you did a GraphQL-over-HTTP-JSON-level error by failing to post good JSON" and "you did a GraphQL-level error by failing to post good GraphQL".  It seems like you are explicitly showing how every other step in the execution process is handled (validation, operation resolution, variable coercion) so not including GraphQL parsing is a notable absence. I'm just talking something like `{"query": "}"}`.

Author: Fair. Let's split invalid parameters and parsing failure into two separate examples :+1:  - I'll raise a PR.

For example: `NONSENSE`, `{"qeury": "{__typena`

Requests that do not constitute a well-formed GraphQL request should result in
status code `400` (Bad Request).

##### Document validation failure

Requests that fail to pass validation SHOULD be denied execution with a status
code of `400` (Bad Request).

Note: In certain circumstances, for example persisted operations that were
previously known to be valid, the server MAY attempt execution regardless of
validation errors.

Note: Validation rules include those specified in
[the Validation section of the GraphQL specification](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Validation),
and any custom validation rules the server is using (for example: depth limit,
complexity limit).

##### Operation cannot be determined

If [GetOperation()](<https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#GetOperation()>) raises a
{GraphQL request error}, the server SHOULD NOT execute the request and SHOULD
return a status code of `400` (Bad Request).

##### Variable coercion failure

If
[CoerceVariableValues()](<https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#CoerceVariableValues()>)
raises a {GraphQL request error}, the server SHOULD NOT execute the request and

> SHOULD return a status code of `400` (Bad Request).

Reviewer 4: One note: while this is a good idea which I support (and which Apollo Server tries to implement), it's challenging to implement this today in a non-hacky way with `graphql-js`. I thought there was already an issue for this but I couldn't find one so I filed https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/issues/3679

Author: Yeah; I believe the trick right now is that if it doesn't have a `data` property (note that's different from it being present but null) then you can assume it's a `CoerceVariableValues()` or similar request error as opposed to a field error. I think you can actually just straight up use `graphql(...)` and use this heuristic to adhere to the GraphQL-over-HTTP spec, you don't need to call out to the separate methods since all the request errors end up in HTTP 400 anyway. But yeah, it'd be beneficial to have it separate for sure :+1:

Reviewer 4: Ah true, I believe we do map lack of data to 400 but we also want a more
precise error code inline for the different error types and that's what we
can't do without better support from graphql-js.

Author: 💯

##### Field errors encountered during execution

If the operation is executed and no {GraphQL request error} is raised then the
server SHOULD respond with a status code of `200` (Okay). This is the case even
if a {GraphQL field error} is raised during
[GraphQL's ExecuteQuery()](<https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#ExecuteQuery()>) or
[GraphQL's ExecuteMutation()](<https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#ExecuteMutation()>).

<!--
When we add support for subscriptions,
[GraphQL's MapSourceToResponseEvent()](<https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#MapSourceToResponseEvent()>)
should be added to the above.
-->

Note: The GraphQL specification
[differentiates field errors from request errors](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Handling-Field-Errors)
and refers to the situation wherein a {GraphQL field error} occurs as a partial
response; it still indicates successful execution.

## Processing the response

> If the response uses a non-`200` status code and the media type of the response

Reviewer 4: For what it's worth, the Apollo implementation of persisted queries does violate this MUST NOT: persisted query-related errors are sent (currently) as `application/json` with 400s and are parsed by the client.

If a literal `null` is desired, the parameter (e.g. {operationName}) should be
omitted.

GET requests MUST NOT be used for executing mutation operations. If the values
of {query} and {operationName} indicate that a mutation operation is to be
executed, the server MUST respond with error status code `405` (Method Not
Allowed) and halt execution. This restriction is necessary to conform with the
long-established semantics of safe methods within HTTP.

## POST

A GraphQL POST request instructs the server to perform a query or mutation
operation. A GraphQL POST request MUST have a body which contains values of the
request parameters encoded in one of the officially recognized GraphQL media
types, or another media type supported by the server.

A client SHOULD indicate the media type of a request body using the
`Content-Type` header as specified in
[RFC7231](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231).

Note: If the client does not include a `Content-Type` header then
`application/json` will be assumed.

### JSON Encoding

When encoded in JSON, a GraphQL-over-HTTP request is a JSON object (map), with
the properties specified by the GraphQL-over-HTTP request:

> - {query} - the string representation the Source Text of the Document as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- {query} - the string representation of the Source Text of the Document as
```

  specified in
  [the Language section of the GraphQL specification](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Language).
- {operationName} - an optional string
- {variables} - an optional object (map), the keys of which are the variable
  names and the values of which are the variable values
- {extensions} - an optional object (map)

### Legacy watershed

Before 1st January 2025 (`2025-01-01T00:00:00Z`), if a client does not know the
media types the server supports then it SHOULD use
`Content-Type: application/json` in requests. After this date, if a client does
not know the media types the server supports then it SHOULD use
`Content-Type: application/graphql+json` in requests.

### Example

If we wanted to execute the following GraphQL query:

```graphql example
query ($id: ID!) {
  user(id: $id) {
    name
  }
}
```

With the following query variables:

```json example
{
  "id": "QVBJcy5ndXJ1"
}
```

This request could be sent via an HTTP POST to the relevant URL using the JSON
encoding with the headers:

```headers example
Content-Type: application/graphql+json
Accept: application/graphql+json
```

And the body:

```json example
{

>   "query": "query ($id: ID!) { user(id:$id) { name } }",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "query": "query($id:ID!){user(id:$id){name}}",
```

Or add in `\n` and whitespace to make it equivalent to the previous example

Author: I simplified the query first, but then decided it was valuable to show `\n` in the encoded data, so I have gone with the whitespace option :+1: Thanks @spawnia

Reviewer: I agree that inclusion of whitespace makes it obvious that the string can be included as-is and does not need to be compressed. Should we recommend or mention compression in a non-normative section?

The server SHOULD NOT use a `4xx` or `5xx` status code.

Note: For compatibility with legacy servers, this specification allows the use

> of `4xx` or `5xx` status code for failed requests where the responses uses the

Reviewer 2: Consider `requests where the response uses` or `requests where the responses use`
